
Hortense Daniel pushed her window ajar and whispered:

"Are you there, Rossigny?"

"I am here," replied a voice from the shrubbery at the front of the house.

Leaning forward, she saw a rather fat man looking up at her out of a gross
red face with its cheeks and chin set in unpleasantly fair whiskers.

"Well?" he asked.

"Well, I had a great argument with my uncle and aunt last night. They
absolutely refuse to sign the document of which my lawyer sent them the
draft, or to restore the dowry squandered by my husband."

"But your uncle is responsible by the terms of the marriage-settlement."

"No matter. He refuses."

"Well, what do you propose to do?"

"Are you still determined to run away with me?" she asked, with a laugh.

"More so than ever."

"Your intentions are strictly honourable, remember!"

"Just as you please. You know that I am madly in love with you."

"Unfortunately I am not madly in love with you!"

"Then what made you choose me?"

"Chance. I was bored. I was growing tired of my humdrum existence. So I'm
ready to run risks.... Here's my luggage: catch!"

She let down from the window a couple of large leather kit-bags. Rossigny
caught them in his arms.

"The die is cast," she whispered. "Go and wait for me with your car at the
If cross-roads. I shall come on horseback."

"Hang it, I can't run off with your horse!"

"He will go home by himself."

"Capital!... Oh, by the way...."

"What is it?"

"Who is this Prince Rénine, who's been here the last three days and whom
nobody seems to know?"

"I don't know much about him. My uncle met him at a friend's shoot and
asked him here to stay."

"You seem to have made a great impression on him. You went for a long ride
with him yesterday. He's a man I don't care for."

"In two hours I shall have left the house in your company. The scandal will
cool him off.... Well, we've talked long enough. We have no time to lose."

For a few minutes she stood watching the fat man bending under the weight
of her traps as he moved away in the shelter of an empty avenue. Then she
closed the window.

Outside, in the park, the huntsmen's horns were sounding the reveille. The
hounds burst into frantic baying. It was the opening day of the hunt that
morning at the Château de la Marèze, where, every year, in the first week
in September, the Comte d'Aigleroche, a mighty hunter before the Lord,
and his countess were accustomed to invite a few personal friends and the
neighbouring landowners.

Hortense slowly finished dressing, put on a riding-habit, which
revealed the lines of her supple figure, and a wide-brimmed felt hat,
which encircled her lovely face and auburn hair, and sat down to her
writing-desk, at which she wrote to her uncle, M. d'Aigleroche, a farewell
letter to be delivered to him that evening. It was a difficult letter to
word; and, after beginning it several times, she ended by giving up the
idea.

"I will write to him later," she said to herself, "when his anger has
cooled down."

And she went downstairs to the dining-room.

Enormous logs were blazing in the hearth of the lofty room. The walls were
hung with trophies of rifles and shotguns. The guests were flocking in from
every side, shaking hands with the Comte d'Aigleroche, one of those typical
country squires, heavily and powerfully built, who lives only for hunting
and shooting. He was standing before the fire, with a large glass of old
brandy in his hand, drinking the health of each new arrival.

Hortense kissed him absently:

"What, uncle! You who are usually so sober!"

"Pooh!" he said. "A man may surely indulge himself a little once a
year!..."

"Aunt will give you a scolding!"

"Your aunt has one of her sick headaches and is not coming down. Besides,"
he added, gruffly, "it is not her business ... and still less is it yours,
my dear child."

Prince Rénine came up to Hortense. He was a young man, very smartly
dressed, with a narrow and rather pale face, whose eyes held by turns
the gentlest and the harshest, the most friendly and the most satirical
expression. He bowed to her, kissed her hand and said:

"May I remind you of your kind promise, dear madame?"

"My promise?"

"Yes, we agreed that we should repeat our delightful excursion of yesterday
and try to go over that old boarded-up place the look of which made us so
curious. It seems to be known as the Domaine de Halingre."

She answered a little curtly:

"I'm extremely sorry, monsieur, but it would be rather far and I'm feeling
a little done up. I shall go for a canter in the park and come indoors
again."

There was a pause. Then Serge Rénine said, smiling, with his eyes fixed on
hers and in a voice which she alone could hear:

"I am sure that you'll keep your promise and that you'll let me come with
you. It would be better."

"For whom? For you, you mean?"

"For you, too, I assure you."

She coloured slightly, but did not reply, shook hands with a few people
around her and left the room.

A groom was holding the horse at the foot of the steps. She mounted and set
off towards the woods beyond the park.

It was a cool, still morning. Through the leaves, which barely quivered,
the sky showed crystalline blue. Hortense rode at a walk down winding
avenues which in half an hour brought her to a country-side of ravines and
bluffs intersected by the high-road.

She stopped. There was not a sound. Rossigny must have stopped his engine
and concealed the car in the thickets around the If cross-roads.

She was five hundred yards at most from that circular space. After
hesitating for a few seconds, she dismounted, tied her horse carelessly, so
that he could release himself by the least effort and return to the house,
shrouded her face in the long brown veil that hung over her shoulders and
walked on.

As she expected, she saw Rossigny directly she reached the first turn in
the road. He ran up to her and drew her into the coppice!

"Quick, quick! Oh, I was so afraid that you would be late ... or even
change your mind! And here you are! It seems too good to be true!"

She smiled:

"You appear to be quite happy to do an idiotic thing!"

"I should think I _am_ happy! And so will you be, I swear you will!
Your life will be one long fairy-tale. You shall have every luxury, and all
the money you can wish for."

"I want neither money nor luxuries."

"What then?"

"Happiness."

"You can safely leave your happiness to me."

She replied, jestingly:

"I rather doubt the quality of the happiness which you would give me."

"Wait! You'll see! You'll see!"

They had reached the motor. Rossigny, still stammering expressions of
delight, started the engine. Hortense stepped in and wrapped herself in a
wide cloak. The car followed the narrow, grassy path which led back to the
cross-roads and Rossigny was accelerating the speed, when he was suddenly
forced to pull up. A shot had rung out from the neighbouring wood, on the
right. The car was swerving from side to side.

"A front tire burst," shouted Rossigny, leaping to the ground.

"Not a bit of it!" cried Hortense. "Somebody fired!"

"Impossible, my dear! Don't be so absurd!"

At that moment, two slight shocks were felt and two more reports were
heard, one after the other, some way off and still in the wood.

Rossigny snarled:

"The back tires burst now ... both of them.... But who, in the devil's
name, can the ruffian be?... Just let me get hold of him, that's all!..."

He clambered up the road-side slope. There was no one there. Moreover, the
leaves of the coppice blocked the view.

"Damn it! Damn it!" he swore. "You were right: somebody was firing at the
car! Oh, this is a bit thick! We shall be held up for hours! Three tires to
mend!... But what are you doing, dear girl?"

Hortense herself had alighted from the car. She ran to him, greatly
excited:

"I'm going."

"But why?"

"I want to know. Some one fired. I want to know who it was."

"Don't let us separate, please!"

"Do you think I'm going to wait here for you for hours?"

"What about your running away?... All our plans ...?"

"We'll discuss that to-morrow. Go back to the house. Take back my things
with you.... And good-bye for the present."

She hurried, left him, had the good luck to find her horse and set off at a
gallop in a direction leading away from La Marèze.

There was not the least doubt in her mind that the three shots had been
fired by Prince Rénine.

"It was he," she muttered, angrily, "it was he. No one else would be
capable of such behaviour."

Besides, he had warned her, in his smiling, masterful way, that he would
expect her.

She was weeping with rage and humiliation. At that moment, had she found
herself face to face with Prince Rénine, she could have struck him with her
riding-whip.

Before her was the rugged and picturesque stretch of country which lies
between the Orne and the Sarthe, above Alençon, and which is known as
Little Switzerland. Steep hills compelled her frequently to moderate her
pace, the more so as she had to cover some six miles before reaching her
destination. But, though the speed at which she rode became less headlong,
though her physical effort gradually slackened, she nevertheless persisted
in her indignation against Prince Rénine. She bore him a grudge not only
for the unspeakable action of which he had been guilty, but also for his
behaviour to her during the last three days, his persistent attentions, his
assurance, his air of excessive politeness.

She was nearly there. In the bottom of a valley, an old park-wall, full
of cracks and covered with moss and weeds, revealed the ball-turret of a
château and a few windows with closed shutters. This was the Domaine de
Halingre.

She followed the wall and turned a corner. In the middle of the
crescent-shaped space before which lay the entrance-gates, Serge Rénine
stood waiting beside his horse.

She sprang to the ground, and, as he stepped forward, hat in hand, thanking
her for coming, she cried:

"One word, monsieur, to begin with. Something quite inexplicable happened
just now. Three shots were fired at a motor-car in which I was sitting. Did
you fire those shots?"

"Yes."

She seemed dumbfounded:

"Then you confess it?"

"You have asked a question, madame, and I have answered it."

"But how dared you? What gave you the right?"

"I was not exercising a right, madame; I was performing a duty!"

"Indeed! And what duty, pray?"

"The duty of protecting you against a man who is trying to profit by your
troubles."

"I forbid you to speak like that. I am responsible for my own actions, and
I decided upon them in perfect liberty."

"Madame, I overheard your conversation with M. Rossigny this morning and it
did not appear to me that you were accompanying him with a light heart. I
admit the ruthlessness and bad taste of my interference and I apologise for
it humbly; but I risked being taken for a ruffian in order to give you a
few hours for reflection."

"I have reflected fully, monsieur. When I have once made up my mind to a
thing, I do not change it."

"Yes, madame, you do, sometimes. If not, why are you here instead of
there?"

Hortense was confused for a moment. All her anger had subsided. She looked
at Rénine with the surprise which one experiences when confronted with
certain persons who are unlike their fellows, more capable of performing
unusual actions, more generous and disinterested. She realised perfectly
that he was acting without any ulterior motive or calculation, that he was,
as he had said, merely fulfilling his duty as a gentleman to a woman who
has taken the wrong turning.

Speaking very gently, he said:

"I know very little about you, madame, but enough to make me wish to be of
use to you. You are twenty-six years old and have lost both your parents.
Seven years ago, you became the wife of the Comte d'Aigleroche's nephew by
marriage, who proved to be of unsound mind, half insane indeed, and had
to be confined. This made it impossible for you to obtain a divorce and
compelled you, since your dowry had been squandered, to live with your
uncle and at his expense. It's a depressing environment. The count and
countess do not agree. Years ago, the count was deserted by his first wife,
who ran away with the countess' first husband. The abandoned husband and
wife decided out of spite to unite their fortunes, but found nothing but
disappointment and ill-will in this second marriage. And you suffer the
consequences. They lead a monotonous, narrow, lonely life for eleven months
or more out of the year. One day, you met M. Rossigny, who fell in love
with you and suggested an elopement. You did not care for him. But you were
bored, your youth was being wasted, you longed for the unexpected, for
adventure ... in a word, you accepted with the very definite intention of
keeping your admirer at arm's length, but also with the rather ingenuous
hope that the scandal would force your uncle's hand and make him account
for his trusteeship and assure you of an independent existence. That is how
you stand. At present you have to choose between placing yourself in M.
Rossigny's hands ... or trusting yourself to me."

She raised her eyes to his. What did he mean? What was the purport of this
offer which he made so seriously, like a friend who asks nothing but to
prove his devotion?

After a moment's silence, he took the two horses by the bridle and tied
them up. Then he examined the heavy gates, each of which was strengthened
by two planks nailed cross-wise. An electoral poster, dated twenty years
earlier, showed that no one had entered the domain since that time.

Rénine tore up one of the iron posts which supported a railing that ran
round the crescent and used it as a lever. The rotten planks gave way. One
of them uncovered the lock, which he attacked with a big knife, containing
a number of blades and implements. A minute later, the gate opened on a
waste of bracken which led up to a long, dilapidated building, with a
turret at each corner and a sort of a belvedere, built on a taller tower,
in the middle.

The Prince turned to Hortense:

"You are in no hurry," he said. "You will form your decision this evening;
and, if M. Rossigny succeeds in persuading you for the second time, I give
you my word of honour that I shall not cross your path. Until then, grant
me the privilege of your company. We made up our minds yesterday to inspect
the château. Let us do so. Will you? It is as good a way as any of passing
the time and I have a notion that it will not be uninteresting."

He had a way of talking which compelled obedience. He seemed to be
commanding and entreating at the same time. Hortense did not even seek
to shake off the enervation into which her will was slowly sinking. She
followed him to a half-demolished flight of steps at the top of which was
a door likewise strengthened by planks nailed in the form of a cross.

Rénine went to work in the same way as before. They entered a spacious
hall paved with white and black flagstones, furnished with old sideboards
and choir-stalls and adorned with a carved escutcheon which displayed the
remains of armorial bearings, representing an eagle standing on a block of
stone, all half-hidden behind a veil of cobwebs which hung down over a pair
of folding-doors.

"The door of the drawing-room, evidently," said Rénine.

He found this more difficult to open; and it was only by repeatedly
charging it with his shoulder that he was able to move one of the doors.

Hortense had not spoken a word. She watched not without surprise this
series of forcible entries, which were accomplished with a really masterly
skill. He guessed her thoughts and, turning round, said in a serious voice:

"It's child's-play to me. I was a locksmith once."

She seized his arm and whispered:

"Listen!"

"To what?" he asked.

She increased the pressure of her hand, to demand silence. The next moment,
he murmured:

"It's really very strange."

"Listen, listen!" Hortense repeated, in bewilderment. "Can it be possible?"

They heard, not far from where they were standing, a sharp sound, the sound
of a light tap recurring at regular intervals; and they had only to listen
attentively to recognise the ticking of a clock. Yes, it was this and
nothing else that broke the profound silence of the dark room; it was
indeed the deliberate ticking, rhythmical as the beat of a metronome,
produced by a heavy brass pendulum. That was it! And nothing could be more
impressive than the measured pulsation of this trivial mechanism, which by
some miracle, some inexplicable phenomenon, had continued to live in the
heart of the dead château.

"And yet," stammered Hortense, without daring to raise her voice, "no one
has entered the house?"

"No one."

"And it is quite impossible for that clock to have kept going for twenty
years without being wound up?"

"Quite impossible."

"Then ...?"

Serge Rénine opened the three windows and threw back the shutters.

He and Hortense were in a drawing-room, as he had thought; and the room
showed not the least sign of disorder. The chairs were in their places. Not
a piece of furniture was missing. The people who had lived there and who
had made it the most individual room in their house had gone away leaving
everything just as it was, the books which they used to read, the
knick-knacks on the tables and consoles.

Rénine examined the old grandfather's clock, contained in its tall carved
case which showed the disk of the pendulum through an oval pane of glass.
He opened the door of the clock. The weights hanging from the cords were at
their lowest point.

At that moment there was a click. The clock struck eight with a serious
note which Hortense was never to forget.

"How extraordinary!" she said.

"Extraordinary indeed," said he, "for the works are exceedingly simple and
would hardly keep going for a week."

"And do you see nothing out of the common?"

"No, nothing ... or, at least...."

He stooped and, from the back of the case, drew a metal tube which was
concealed by the weights. Holding it up to the light:

"A telescope," he said, thoughtfully. "Why did they hide it?... And they
left it drawn out to its full length.... That's odd.... What does it mean?"

The clock, as is sometimes usual, began to strike a second time, sounding
eight strokes. Rénine closed the case and continued his inspection without
putting his telescope down. A wide arch led from the drawing-room to a
smaller apartment, a sort of smoking-room. This also was furnished, but
contained a glass case for guns of which the rack was empty. Hanging on
a panel near by was a calendar with the date of the 5th of September.

"Oh," cried Hortense, in astonishment, "the same date as to-day!... They
tore off the leaves until the 5th of September.... And this is the
anniversary! What an astonishing coincidence!"

"Astonishing," he echoed. "It's the anniversary of their departure ...
twenty years ago to-day."

"You must admit," she said, "that all this is incomprehensible.

"Yes, of course ... but, all the same ... perhaps not."

"Have you any idea?"

He waited a few seconds before replying:

"What puzzles me is this telescope hidden, dropped in that corner, at
the last moment. I wonder what it was used for.... From the ground-floor
windows you see nothing but the trees in the garden ... and the same, I
expect, from all the windows.... We are in a valley, without the least open
horizon.... To use the telescope, one would have to go up to the top of the
house.... Shall we go up?"

She did not hesitate. The mystery surrounding the whole adventure excited
her curiosity so keenly that she could think of nothing but accompanying
Rénine and assisting him in his investigations.

They went upstairs accordingly, and, on the second floor, came to a landing
where they found the spiral staircase leading to the belvedere.

At the top of this was a platform in the open air, but surrounded by a
parapet over six feet high.

"There must have been battlements which have been filled in since,"
observed Prince Rénine. "Look here, there were loop-holes at one time. They
may have been blocked."

"In any case," she said, "the telescope was of no use up here either and we
may as well go down again."

"I don't agree," he said. "Logic tells us that there must have been some
gap through which the country could be seen and this was the spot where the
telescope was used."

He hoisted himself by his wrists to the top of the parapet and then saw
that this point of vantage commanded the whole of the valley, including the
park, with its tall trees marking the horizon; and, beyond, a depression
in a wood surmounting a hill, at a distance of some seven or eight hundred
yards, stood another tower, squat and in ruins, covered with ivy from top
to bottom.

Rénine resumed his inspection. He seemed to consider that the key to the
problem lay in the use to which the telescope was put and that the problem
would be solved if only they could discover this use.

He studied the loop-holes one after the other. One of them, or rather the
place which it had occupied, attracted his attention above the rest. In
the middle of the layer of plaster, which had served to block it, there
was a hollow filled with earth in which plants had grown. He pulled out
the plants and removed the earth, thus clearing the mouth of a hole some
five inches in diameter, which completely penetrated the wall. On bending
forward, Rénine perceived that this deep and narrow opening inevitably
carried the eye, above the dense tops of the trees and through the
depression in the hill, to the ivy-clad tower.

At the bottom of this channel, in a sort of groove which ran through it
like a gutter, the telescope fitted so exactly that it was quite impossible
to shift it, however little, either to the right or to the left.

Rénine, after wiping the outside of the lenses, while taking care not to
disturb the lie of the instrument by a hair's breadth, put his eye to the
small end.

He remained for thirty or forty seconds, gazing attentively and silently.
Then he drew himself up and said, in a husky voice:

"It's terrible ... it's really terrible."

"What is?" she asked, anxiously.

"Look."

She bent down but the image was not clear to her and the telescope had to
be focussed to suit her sight. The next moment she shuddered and said:

"It's two scarecrows, isn't it, both stuck up on the top? But why?"

"Look again," he said. "Look more carefully under the hats ... the
faces...."

"Oh!" she cried, turning faint with horror, "how awful!"

The field of the telescope, like the circular picture shown by a magic
lantern, presented this spectacle: the platform of a broken tower, the
walls of which were higher in the more distant part and formed as it were
a back-drop, over which surged waves of ivy. In front, amid a cluster of
bushes, were two human beings, a man and a woman, leaning back against a
heap of fallen stones.

But the words man and woman could hardly be applied to these two forms,
these two sinister puppets, which, it is true, wore clothes and hats--or
rather shreds of clothes and remnants of hats--but had lost their eyes,
their cheeks, their chins, every particle of flesh, until they were
actually and positively nothing more than two skeletons.

"Two skeletons," stammered Hortense. "Two skeletons with clothes on. Who
carried them up there?"

"Nobody."

"But still...."

"That man and that woman must have died at the top of the tower, years and
years ago ... and their flesh rotted under their clothes and the ravens ate
them."

"But it's hideous, hideous!" cried Hortense, pale as death, her face drawn
with horror.

       *       *       *       *       *

Half an hour later, Hortense Daniel and Rénine left the Château de
Halingre. Before their departure, they had gone as far as the ivy-grown
tower, the remains of an old donjon-keep more than half demolished. The
inside was empty. There seemed to have been a way of climbing to the top,
at a comparatively recent period, by means of wooden stairs and ladders
which now lay broken and scattered over the ground. The tower backed
against the wall which marked the end of the park.

A curious fact, which surprised Hortense, was that Prince Rénine had
neglected to pursue a more minute enquiry, as though the matter had lost
all interest for him. He did not even speak of it any longer; and, in the
inn at which they stopped and took a light meal in the nearest village, it
was she who asked the landlord about the abandoned château. But she learnt
nothing from him, for the man was new to the district and could give her no
particulars. He did not even know the name of the owner.

They turned their horses' heads towards La Marèze. Again and again Hortense
recalled the squalid sight which had met their eyes. But Rénine, who was
in a lively mood and full of attentions to his companion, seemed utterly
indifferent to those questions.

"But, after all," she exclaimed, impatiently, "we can't leave the matter
there! It calls for a solution."

"As you say," he replied, "a solution is called for. M. Rossigny has to
know where he stands and you have to decide what to do about him."

She shrugged her shoulders: "He's of no importance for the moment. The
thing to-day...."

"Is what?"

"Is to know what those two dead bodies are."

"Still, Rossigny...."

"Rossigny can wait. But I can't. You have shown me a mystery which is now
the only thing that matters. What do you intend to do?"

"To do?"

"Yes. There are two bodies.... You'll inform the police, I suppose."

"Gracious goodness!" he exclaimed, laughing. "What for?"

"Well, there's a riddle that has to be cleared up at all costs, a terrible
tragedy."

"We don't need any one to do that."

"What! Do you mean to say that you understand it?"

"Almost as plainly as though I had read it in a book, told in full detail,
with explanatory illustrations. It's all so simple!"

She looked at him askance, wondering if he was making fun of her. But he
seemed quite serious.

"Well?" she asked, quivering with curiosity.

The light was beginning to wane. They had trotted at a good pace; and the
hunt was returning as they neared La Marèze.

"Well," he said, "we shall get the rest of our information from people
living round about ... from your uncle, for instance; and you will see how
logically all the facts fit in. When you hold the first link of a chain,
you are bound, whether you like it or not, to reach the last. It's the
greatest fun in the world."

Once in the house, they separated. On going to her room, Hortense found her
luggage and a furious letter from Rossigny in which he bade her good-bye
and announced his departure.

Then Rénine knocked at her door:

"Your uncle is in the library," he said. "Will you go down with me? I've
sent word that I am coming."

She went with him. He added:

"One word more. This morning, when I thwarted your plans and begged you to
trust me, I naturally undertook an obligation towards you which I mean to
fulfill without delay. I want to give you a positive proof of this."

She laughed:

"The only obligation which you took upon yourself was to satisfy my
curiosity."

"It shall be satisfied," he assured her, gravely, "and more fully than you
can possibly imagine."

M. d'Aigleroche was alone. He was smoking his pipe and drinking sherry. He
offered a glass to Rénine, who refused.

"Well, Hortense!" he said, in a rather thick voice. "You know that it's
pretty dull here, except in these September days. You must make the most
of them. Have you had a pleasant ride with Rénine?"

"That's just what I wanted to talk about, my dear sir," interrupted the
prince.

"You must excuse me, but I have to go to the station in ten minutes, to
meet a friend of my wife's."

"Oh, ten minutes will be ample!"

"Just the time to smoke a cigarette?"

"No longer."

He took a cigarette from the case which M. d'Aigleroche handed to him, lit
it and said:

"I must tell you that our ride happened to take us to an old domain which
you are sure to know, the Domaine de Halingre."

"Certainly I know it. But it has been closed, boarded up for twenty-five
years or so. You weren't able to get in, I suppose?"

"Yes, we were."

"Really? Was it interesting?"

"Extremely. We discovered the strangest things."

"What things?" asked the count, looking at his watch.

Rénine described what they had seen:

"On a tower some way from the house there were two dead bodies, two
skeletons rather ... a man and a woman still wearing the clothes which
they had on when they were murdered."

"Come, come, now! Murdered?"

"Yes; and that is what we have come to trouble you about. The tragedy must
date back to some twenty years ago. Was nothing known of it at the time?"

"Certainly not," declared the count. "I never heard of any such crime or
disappearance."

"Oh, really!" said Rénine, looking a little disappointed. "I hoped to
obtain a few particulars."

"I'm sorry."

"In that case, I apologise."

He consulted Hortense with a glance and moved towards the door. But on
second thought:

"Could you not at least, my dear sir, bring me into touch with some persons
in the neighbourhood, some members of your family, who might know more
about it?"

"Of my family? And why?"

"Because the Domaine de Halingre used to belong and no doubt still belongs
to the d'Aigleroches. The arms are an eagle on a heap of stones, on a rock.
This at once suggested the connection."

This time the count appeared surprised. He pushed back his decanter and his
glass of sherry and said:

"What's this you're telling me? I had no idea that we had any such
neighbours."

Rénine shook his head and smiled:

"I should be more inclined to believe, sir, that you were not very eager to
admit any relationship between yourself ... and the unknown owner of the
property."

"Then he's not a respectable man?"

"The man, to put it plainly, is a murderer."

"What do you mean?"

The count had risen from his chair. Hortense, greatly excited, said:

"Are you really sure that there has been a murder and that the murder was
done by some one belonging to the house?"

"Quite sure."

"But why are you so certain?"

"Because I know who the two victims were and what caused them to be
killed."

Prince Rénine was making none but positive statements and his method
suggested the belief that he supported by the strongest proofs.

M. d'Aigleroche strode up and down the room, with his hands behind his
back. He ended by saying:

"I always had an instinctive feeling that something had happened, but I
never tried to find out.... Now, as a matter of fact, twenty years ago,
a relation of mine, a distant cousin, used to live at the Domaine de
Halingre. I hoped, because of the name I bear, that this story, which,
as I say, I never knew but suspected, would remain hidden for ever."

"So this cousin killed somebody?"

"Yes, he was obliged to."

Rénine shook his head:

"I am sorry to have to amend that phrase, my dear sir. The truth, on the
contrary, is that your cousin took his victims' lives in cold blood and in
a cowardly manner. I never heard of a crime more deliberately and craftily
planned."

"What is it that you know?"

The moment had come for Rénine to explain himself, a solemn and
anguish-stricken moment, the full gravity of which Hortense understood,
though she had not yet divined any part of the tragedy which the prince
unfolded step by step."

"It's a very simple story," he said. "There is every reason to believe that
M. d'Aigleroche was married and that there was another couple living in
the neighbourhood with whom the owner of the Domaine de Halingre were on
friendly terms. What happened one day, which of these four persons first
disturbed the relations between the two households, I am unable to say. But
a likely version, which at once occurs to the mind, is that your cousin's
wife, Madame d'Aigleroche, was in the habit of meeting the other husband
in the ivy-covered tower, which had a door opening outside the estate. On
discovering the intrigue, your cousin d'Aigleroche resolved to be revenged,
but in such a manner that there should be no scandal and that no one
even should ever know that the guilty pair had been killed. Now he had
ascertained--as I did just now--that there was a part of the house, the
belvedere, from which you can see, over the trees and the undulations of
the park, the tower standing eight hundred yards away, and that this was
the only place that overlooked the top of the tower. He therefore pierced
a hole in the parapet, through one of the former loopholes, and from
there, by using a telescope which fitted exactly in the grove which he
had hollowed out, he watched the meetings of the two lovers. And it was
from there, also, that, after carefully taking all his measurements, and
calculating all his distances, on a Sunday, the 5th of September, when the
house was empty, he killed them with two shots."

The truth was becoming apparent. The light of day was breaking. The count
muttered:

"Yes, that's what must have happened. I expect that my cousin
d'Aigleroche...."

"The murderer," Rénine continued, "stopped up the loophole neatly with a
clod of earth. No one would ever know that two dead bodies were decaying
on the top of that tower which was never visited and of which he took the
precaution to demolish the wooden stairs. Nothing therefore remained for
him to do but to explain the disappearance of his wife and his friend. This
presented no difficulty. He accused them of having eloped together."

Hortense gave a start. Suddenly, as though the last sentence were a
complete and to her an absolutely unexpected revelation, she understood
what Rénine was trying to convey:

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"I mean that M. d'Aigleroche accused his wife and his friend of eloping
together."

"No, no!" she cried. "I can't allow that!... You are speaking of a cousin
of my uncle's? Why mix up the two stories?"

"Why mix up this story with another which took place at that time?" said
the prince. "But I am not mixing them up, my dear madame; there is only one
story and I am telling it as it happened."

Hortense turned to her uncle. He sat silent, with his arms folded; and
his head remained in the shadow cast by the lamp-shade. Why had he not
protested?

Rénine repeated in a firm tone:

"There is only one story. On the evening of that very day, the 5th of
September at eight o'clock, M. d'Aigleroche, doubtless alleging as his
reason that he was going in pursuit of the runaway couple, left his house
after boarding up the entrance. He went away, leaving all the rooms as
they were and removing only the firearms from their glass case. At the
last minute, he had a presentiment, which has been justified to-day, that
the discovery of the telescope which had played so great a part in the
preparation of his crime might serve as a clue to an enquiry; and he threw
it into the clock-case, where, as luck would have it, it interrupted
the swing of the pendulum. This unreflecting action, one of those which
every criminal inevitably commits, was to betray him twenty years later.
Just now, the blows which I struck to force the door of the drawing-room
released the pendulum. The clock was set going, struck eight o'clock ...
and I possessed the clue of thread which was to lead me through the
labyrinth."

"Proofs!" stammered Hortense. "Proofs!"

"Proofs?" replied Rénine, in a loud voice. "Why, there are any number
of proofs; and you know them as well as I do. Who could have killed at
that distance of eight hundred yards, except an expert shot, an ardent
sportsman? You agree, M. d'Aigleroche, do you not?... Proofs? Why was
nothing removed from the house, nothing except the guns, those guns
which an ardent sportsman cannot afford to leave behind--you agree, M.
d'Aigleroche--those guns which we find here, hanging in trophies on the
walls!... Proofs? What about that date, the 5th of September, which was
the date of the crime and which has left such a horrible memory in the
criminal's mind that every year at this time--at this time alone--he
surrounds himself with distractions and that every year, on this same 5th
of September, he forgets his habits of temperance? Well, to-day, is the 5th
of September.... Proofs? Why, if there weren't any others, would that not
be enough for you?"

And Rénine, flinging out his arm, pointed to the Comte d'Aigleroche, who,
terrified by this evocation of the past, had sunk huddled into a chair and
was hiding his head in his hands.

Hortense did not attempt to argue with him. She had never liked her uncle,
or rather her husband's uncle. She now accepted the accusation laid against
him.

Sixty seconds passed. Then M. d'Aigleroche walked up to them and said:

"Whether the story be true or not, you can't call a husband a criminal for
avenging his honour and killing his faithless wife."

"No," replied Rénine, "but I have told only the first version of the story.
There is another which is infinitely more serious ... and more probable,
one to which a more thorough investigation would be sure to lead."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean this. It may not be a matter of a husband taking the law into his
own hands, as I charitably supposed. It may be a matter of a ruined man who
covets his friend's money and his friend's wife and who, with this object
in view, to secure his freedom, to get rid of his friend and of his own
wife, draws them into a trap, suggests to them that they should visit that
lonely tower and kills them by shooting them from a distance safely under
cover."

"No, no," the count protested. "No, all that is untrue."

"I don't say it isn't. I am basing my accusation on proofs, but also on
intuitions and arguments which up to now have been extremely accurate. All
the same, I admit that the second version may be incorrect. But, if so, why
feel any remorse? One does not feel remorse for punishing guilty people."

"One does for taking life. It is a crushing burden to bear."

"Was it to give himself greater strength to bear this burden that M.
d'Aigleroche afterwards married his victim's widow? For that, sir, is
the crux of the question. What was the motive of that marriage? Was M.
d'Aigleroche penniless? Was the woman he was taking as his second wife
rich? Or were they both in love with each other and did M. d'Aigleroche
plan with her to kill his first wife and the husband of his second wife?
These are problems to which I do not know the answer. They have no interest
for the moment; but the police, with all the means at their disposal, would
have no great difficulty in elucidating them."

M. d'Aigleroche staggered and had to steady himself against the back of a
chair. Livid in the face, he spluttered:

"Are you going to inform the police?"

"No, no," said Rénine. "To begin with, there is the statute of limitations.
Then there are twenty years of remorse and dread, a memory which will
pursue the criminal to his dying hour, accompanied no doubt by domestic
discord, hatred, a daily hell ... and, in the end, the necessity of
returning to the tower and removing the traces of the two murders, the
frightful punishment of climbing that tower, of touching those skeletons,
of undressing them and burying them. That will be enough. We will not ask
for more. We will not give it to the public to batten on and create a
scandal which would recoil upon M. d'Aigleroche's niece. No, let us leave
this disgraceful business alone."

The count resumed his seat at the table, with his hands clutching his
forehead, and asked:

"Then why ...?"

"Why do I interfere?" said Rénine. "What you mean is that I must have
had some object in speaking. That is so. There must indeed be a penalty,
however slight, and our interview must lead to some practical result. But
have no fear: M. d'Aigleroche will be let off lightly."

The contest was ended. The count felt that he had only a small formality to
fulfil, a sacrifice to accept; and, recovering some of his self-assurance,
he said, in an almost sarcastic tone:

"What's your price?"

Rénine burst out laughing:

"Splendid! You see the position. Only, you make a mistake in drawing me
into the business. I'm working for the glory of the thing."

"In that case?"

"You will be called upon at most to make restitution."

"Restitution?"

Rénine leant over the table and said:

"In one of those drawers is a deed awaiting your signature. It is a draft
agreement between you and your niece Hortense Daniel, relating to her
private fortune, which fortune was squandered and for which you are
responsible. Sign the deed."

M. d'Aigleroche gave a start:

"Do you know the amount?"

"I don't wish to know it."

"And if I refuse?..."

"I shall ask to see the Comtesse d'Aigleroche."

Without further hesitation, the count opened a drawer, produced a document
on stamped paper and quickly signed it:

"Here you are," he said, "and I hope...."

"You hope, as I do, that you and I may never have any future dealings? I'm
convinced of it. I shall leave this evening; your niece, no doubt,
tomorrow. Good-bye."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the drawing-room, which was still empty, while the guests at the
house were dressing for dinner, Rénine handed the deed to Hortense. She
seemed dazed by all that she had heard; and the thing that bewildered her
even more than the relentless light shed upon her uncle's past was the
miraculous insight and amazing lucidity displayed by this man: the man who
for some hours had controlled events and conjured up before her eyes the
actual scenes of a tragedy which no one had beheld.

"Are you satisfied with me?" he asked.

She gave him both her hands:

"You have saved me from Rossigny. You have given me back my freedom and my
independence. I thank you from the bottom of my heart."

"Oh, that's not what I am asking you to say!" he answered. "My first and
main object was to amuse you. Your life seemed so humdrum and lacking in
the unexpected. Has it been so to-day?"

"How can you ask such a question? I have had the strangest and most
stirring experiences."

"That is life," he said. "When one knows how to use one's eyes. Adventure
exists everywhere, in the meanest hovel, under the mask of the wisest of
men. Everywhere, if you are only willing, you will find an excuse for
excitement, for doing good, for saving a victim, for ending an injustice."

Impressed by his power and authority, she murmured:

"Who are you exactly?"

"An adventurer. Nothing more. A lover of adventures. Life is not worth
living except in moments of adventure, the adventures of others or personal
adventures. To-day's has upset you because it affected the innermost depths
of your being. But those of others are no less stimulating. Would you like
to make the experiment?"

"How?"

"Become the companion of my adventures. If any one calls on me for help,
help him with me. If chance or instinct puts me on the track of a crime or
the trace of a sorrow, let us both set out together. Do you consent?"

"Yes," she said, "but...."

She hesitated, as though trying to guess Rénine's secret intentions.

"But," he said, expressing her thoughts for her, with a smile, "you are a
trifle sceptical. What you are saying to yourself is, 'How far does that
lover of adventures want to make me go? It is quite obvious that I attract
him; and sooner or later he would not be sorry to receive payment for his
services.' You are quite right. We must have a formal contract."

"Very formal," said Hortense, preferring to give a jesting tone to the
conversation. "Let me hear your proposals."

He reflected for a moment and continued:

"Well, we'll say this. The clock at Halingre gave eight strokes this
afternoon, the day of the first adventure. Will you accept its decree and
agree to carry out seven more of these delightful enterprises with me,
during a period, for instance, of three months? And shall we say that, at
the eighth, you will be pledged to grant me...."

"What?"

He deferred his answer:

"Observe that you will always be at liberty to leave me on the road if I
do not succeed in interesting you. But, if you accompany me to the end, if
you allow me to begin and complete the eighth enterprise with you, in three
months, on the 5th of December, at the very moment when the eighth stroke
of that clock sounds--and it will sound, you may be sure of that, for the
old brass pendulum will not stop swinging again--you will be pledged to
grant me...."

"What?" she repeated, a little unnerved by waiting.

He was silent. He looked at the beautiful lips which he had meant to claim
as his reward. He felt perfectly certain that Hortense had understood and
he thought it unnecessary to speak more plainly:

"The mere delight of seeing you will be enough to satisfy me. It is not for
me but for you to impose conditions. Name them: what do you demand?"

She was grateful for his respect and said, laughingly:

"What do I demand?"

"Yes."

"Can I demand anything I like, however difficult and impossible?"

"Everything is easy and everything is possible to the man who is bent on
winning you."

Then she said:

"I demand that you shall restore to me a small, antique clasp, made of a
cornelian set in a silver mount. It came to me from my mother and everyone
knew that it used to bring her happiness and me too. Since the day when it
vanished from my jewel-case, I have had nothing but unhappiness. Restore it
to me, my good genius."

"When was the clasp stolen?"

She answered gaily:

"Seven years ago ... or eight ... or nine; I don't know exactly ... I don't
know where ... I don't know how ... I know nothing about it...."

"I will find it," Rénine declared, "and you shall be happy."


